we're just offshore from Prince Edward
Island in the brood Annelle River and
this water is actually some of the most
productive aquaculture water on the
globe this is the water where the blue
mussel is cultivated now to grow a
mussel is actually a rather detailed
process the first step is to collect the
seed ropes are suspended in the water
column the seeds naturally attach
themselves to those ropes and after six
months or so the seeds are collected and
taken ashore they're then sorted and
graded by size and placed in what are
known as socks those socks are brought
back out to the water suspended in the
water column after a year so they've
grown to market size and that's when we
come back and it's time for the harvest
you know Prince Edward Island is
definitely one of the coolest places in
the world to be a chef the fact that I
get to just jump on a mussel boat and go
out to sea and learn a thing or two
about how this harvest works it makes me
a better cook because when you
appreciate and understand the stories
behind your ingredients when you
actually witness the passion and hard
work that goes into the food you cook it
just flat-out makes you a better cook
farming at sea is not that different
from farming on land even out here the
farmer plant seed and hopes for the best
no one knows that better than Bob
fortune your tale your tale up in the
air and you tie a clove hitch around
once around them once around the other
way you've got it because the mussels
are hung from ropes they stay off the
muddy bottom away from hungry predators
and in the water column muscles grow
cleaner plumper and tastier so this is
it they're out they're gone and we'll
see them again in about a year or so yes
they have to be maintained through that
period to had extra flotation right now
they're tying on a buoy for every six ox
that we're tying out that'll keep them
off the bottom up so early next spring
and then we'll have to go over them
again
additional flotation muscles don't need
feet from the farmer instead they absorb
natural food particles present in the
cold clear water in fact each muscle
filters several gallons of water a day
to get its food let's just say after a
year in the water the socks were a
little heavier so what do you see here
we've got some barnacles we've got some
starfish but we've also got a whole lot
of very healthy-looking mussels and I
look at them for the nice smooth shell
and see a check mark in the shell it
would be the size when they were
initially deployed so that line right
there
it's like growth rings on a tree when
every time you disturb it it it gets a
little indentation in the shell so when
they came out of the water at the seed
stage and set that line and then we put
it back in to continue growing yeah so
this so that's one year's growth right
there you know one of the things I find
fascinating about mussels is that we're
able to take them out of the water and
they still stay fresh
that's the mussels natural ability they
have a tightly closing shell that
retains the moisture and liquid within
the shell they'll stay alive out of the
water for two weeks without a problem
which is great for us as consumers I
mean that allows you to get it ashore
get it into the distribution channel get
it to the consumer and it stays fresh
still have an ideal product
now when you hung these socks the
muscles were on the inside of the sock
but now they're on the outside how does
that happen
the muscles are very mobile they they
have a foot that they're Bissell thread
is extruded from and they'll put the
foot on the outside of the mash attached
with Bissell thread and pull themselves
out so they've they've all moved to the
outside of the mesh gives them the best
water flow and best environment to grow
more nutrients basically they're hungry
they'll go where the food is of course
the works not done yet is it we still
have to get these ashore then we've got
to get them off the socket the particles
off of them the starfish off of them
separate them and somehow get the beards
off without harming the actual muscle
all of that before I get to do my job
yes yes we still have a lot of work to
do
Bob I think it makes us better cooks
when we actually understand the hard
work that goes into our ingredients
I mean sometimes we take this sort of
thing for granted but once we understand
the story behind our ingredients somehow
they just end up tasting better so with
that in mind thanks for taking me out to
see today
thanks so much it was my pleasure I'm
looking forward to eating them yeah I'm
looking forward to cooking them they
tuned on future episodes of food country
we'll see how muscles are gently
processed on land and I'll show you how
easy they are to cook